The movie starts with the protagonist having a dream involving the three most famous geological icons. Trilobites, tyrannosaurus rex and a very exaggerated earthquake and completely unrealistic several meter wide fissure with lava at the bottom. Our geology professor protagonist (Brendan) and nephew, Josh Hutcherson (Sean), go to Iceland after finding that Sean's dad's seismometers are all reading picking up the exact same data as when his dad (Max) went missing a decade ago. This is all fine so far, the main issue which makes the geology incorrect in this film happens when they (surprisingly) theorize the Earth is as it is in Jules Verne’s A Journey to the Center of the Earth. Upon arriving in Iceland he goes searching for information about Max's disappearance with a local mountaineer whose dad also went missing. Eventually after reaching the seismometer he immediately breaks it by violently removing it from its foundation which wasn’t the greatest idea. Especially as the fact that he ended up trapped in a cave after.\n\nIn this cave they found some interesting and questionable geology. Firstly, explosive magnesium veins line the wall, magnesium is typically mined as magnesium chloride from evaporites and then separated using electrolysis. These veins are hence most likely magnesium chloride deposited from running water, however this would not be explosive because you would not find pure magnesium metal because it is too reactive. Stalactites on the roof of the cave also provide evidence of water flow in these beds.\n\nBrendan finds some metamorphic rock, specifically schist, he announces this to his posse for no reason other than it interests him despite hanging from a rope rappelling into a deep hole. He even specifies the type of schist: green schist, garnet-containing schist, mica and garnet-containing schist. This accuracy earns the movie bonus geological accuracy points.\n\nThis hole is a hole which can only be an old mine shaft due to its shape which is likely considering a mine sits at the bottom. This mine must be the most profitable ever judging by the size of diamonds they collect and sell when they eventually resurface. Despite diamonds, emeralds and rubies lying everywhere, our protagonist excitedly announces that he has found some feldspar. Extra geology points for spotting a very common mineral before impossible minerals which are probably misidentified. For example, diamond could be quartz and emerald could be pure olivine.\n\nThey also fall through a correctly colored and textured muscovite mica floor (extra accuracy points) which perfectly shows the singular cleavage plane. Any points they gain through this are immediately lost by the following ‘hundreds of miles’ of falling to the center of the earth. They then arrive in a cavern which would collapse if not being held up and cooled by magic (see explanation in the Godzilla vs Kong section). In this world, evolution was paused at the K-Pg boundary, this is proved by the existence of dinosaurs here such as the Tyrannosaurus rex which chases Sean and the ‘cyanis rosopteryx’ (made-up dinosaur birds). The T. rex which chases them shouldn't do so, as T. rex is primarily a scavenger because it has short arms and long legs designed for endurance, not chases of hunters.\n\nThere is light down here equivalent to sunlight somehow. Whatever magical force cools the cave must be rubbish because the surrounding magma heats the cave up occasionally though frustratingly only 72 hours after our gang arrives there.\n\nFinally, Sean crosses a magical magnetic rock bridge and they ride a geyser up to the surface, without being melted, and straight out of the top of Mt. Vesuvius.